VMR Permissible Sources documentation (#14547)
dotnet/arcade: Documentation/UnifiedBuild/VMR-Permissible-Sources.md

# The Unified Build Almanac (TUBA) - Permissible Source Policy

## Purpose

This document provides guidelines on the types of source code that are permissible in the VMR. It explains how the VMR detects binaries and licenses, and it outlines the steps to be taken when a new binary or license is encountered.

## Binaries

### Policy

> OSS licensed binaries are allowed in the VMR, but they require explicit inclusion in the VMR.

Reviewer: I think I see what you're getting at with the "new binary" stuff below. This maybe could be better said as:

"The inclusion/exclusion status of all binaries that could be included in the VMR must be made explicit"

Reviewer: Any binary not explicitly specified is considered "new".

> OSS licensed binaries are allowed in the VMR, but they require explicit inclusion in the VMR.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to express that it is preferred to not have binaries in the VMR.  They can be included as long as they are not required to build the source-build product.

> This action involves adding the binary or its exclusion pattern to either [`allowed-binaries.txt`](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/src/installer/src/VirtualMonoRepo/allowed-binaries.txt) or [`disallowed-sb-binaries.txt`](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/src/installer/src/VirtualMonoRepo/disallowed-sb-binaries.txt). Which file to add the binary or exclusion pattern to depends on whether or not the binary is allowed for source build. For help determining if the newly detected binary is allowed in the source-build context, please contact a member of the source-build team at @dotnet/source-build-internal.

Reviewer: exclusion pattern -> inclusion pattern?

Reviewer: or maybe it's both, based on the rest of the sentence.

Author: They're more inclusion patterns, but it can get confusing based on the context of validating vs cleaning. I reworded the sentences to try to drift away from incluson/exclusion to avoid confusion.

> This action involves adding the binary or its exclusion pattern to either [`allowed-binaries.txt`](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/src/installer/src/VirtualMonoRepo/allowed-binaries.txt) or [`disallowed-sb-binaries.txt`](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/src/installer/src/VirtualMonoRepo/disallowed-sb-binaries.txt). Which file to add the binary or exclusion pattern to depends on whether or not the binary is allowed for source build. For help determining if the newly detected binary is allowed in the source-build context, please contact a member of the source-build team at @dotnet/source-build-internal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This action involves adding the binary or its exclusion pattern to either [`allowed-binaries.txt`](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/src/installer/src/VirtualMonoRepo/allowed-binaries.txt) or [`disallowed-sb-binaries.txt`](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/src/installer/src/VirtualMonoRepo/disallowed-sb-binaries.txt). Which file to add the binary or exclusion pattern to depends on whether or not the binary is allowed for source build. For help determining if the newly detected binary is allowed in the source-build context, please contact a member of the source-build team at [@dotnet/source-build-internal](https://github.com/orgs/dotnet/teams/source-build-internal).
```

If the binary is allowed for source build, add it to `allowed-binaries.txt`. This binary will not be removed during a source build of the product and it will no longer be considered a new binary in the VMR.

> If the binary is not allowed for source build, add it to `disallowed-binaries.txt`. This binary will be removed during a source build of the product, but it will not longer be considered a new binary in the VMR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the binary is not allowed for source build, add it to `disallowed-binaries.txt`. This binary will be removed during a source build of the product, but it will no longer be considered a new binary in the VMR.
```

It's also not clear what "a new binary" means in this context.

> When adding a binary or pattern to either file, remember to include a link to the relevant issue and tag @dotnet/source-build-internal as a reviewer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When adding a binary or pattern to either file, remember to include a link to the relevant issue and tag [@dotnet/source-build-internal](https://github.com/orgs/dotnet/teams/source-build-internal) as a reviewer.
```

### Detection and Removal

> The [BinaryTool](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/tree/main/eng/tools/BinaryToolKit) is used to detect and remove binaries in the VMR. You can run the tool locally by running `eng/prep-source-build.sh`.

Reviewer 2: Consider adding a sample usage command and possible include the relevant output.

For detection, the tool identifies binaries not listed in `allowed-binaries.txt` and `disallowed-sb-binaries.txt`. Any binary not listed in these files is considered "new" and requires explicit action as discussed above.

For removal, the tool identifies binaries not listed in `allowed-binaries.txt`. Any binary not listed in this file is not allowed for source-building and will be removed from the VMR.

## Licenses

### Policy

The VMR does not permit code and binaries licensed under non-OSS licenses.

When a non-OSS license is detected, the offending code and binaries must be cloaked from the VMR. See [the VMR](./VMR-Design-And-Operation.md#repository-source-mappings) and [source-build documentation](https://github.com/dotnet/source-build/blob/main/Documentation/sourcebuild-in-repos/new-repo.md#cloaking-filtering-the-repository-sources) on cloaking.

### Detection

> Licenses are detected by the [license scan smoke test](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/test/Microsoft.DotNet.SourceBuild.SmokeTests/LicenseScanTests.cs). This smoke test is run as part of the [source-build license scan pipeline](https://dev.azure.com/dnceng/internal/_build?definitionId=1301&_a=summary). The test detects any license in the VMR that is not listed in [`LicenseExclusions.txt`](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/test/Microsoft.DotNet.SourceBuild.SmokeTests/assets/LicenseExclusions.txt).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Licenses are detected by the [license scan test](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/test/Microsoft.DotNet.SourceBuild.SmokeTests/LicenseScanTests.cs). This test is run as part of the [source-build license scan pipeline](https://dev.azure.com/dnceng/internal/_build?definitionId=1301&_a=summary) (internal Microsoft link). The test detects any license in the VMR that is not listed in [`LicenseExclusions.txt`](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/test/Microsoft.DotNet.SourceBuild.SmokeTests/assets/LicenseExclusions.txt).
```

> Licenses are detected by the [license scan smoke test](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/test/Microsoft.DotNet.SourceBuild.SmokeTests/LicenseScanTests.cs). This smoke test is run as part of the [source-build license scan pipeline](https://dev.azure.com/dnceng/internal/_build?definitionId=1301&_a=summary). The test detects any license in the VMR that is not listed in [`LicenseExclusions.txt`](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/test/Microsoft.DotNet.SourceBuild.SmokeTests/assets/LicenseExclusions.txt).

Reviewer 2: > not listed in

The exclusions file contains exclusions, it doesn't include any information about the allowed OSS licenses.  It would be good to link to what the allowed OSS licenses are.

If the binary is allowed for source-build, add it to `allowed-sb-binaries.txt`. This binary is now allowed in the VMR for source-build and non-source-build scenarios. The binary will not be removed during a build of the source-build product.

If the binary is not allowed for source-build, add it to `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt`. This binary is now allowed in the VMR for non-source-build scenarios and will be removed during a build of the source-build product.

> [!IMPORTANT]  
> It is best to target a single file or use a specific pattern when adding to either `allowed-sb-binaries.txt` or `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt`. Otherwise, vague patterns may permit binaries into the VMR that were previously undetected. For example, avoid patterns such as `**/test/**` and instead use a more specific patterns like `src/arcade/test/**/*.png`.

When adding a binary or pattern to either `allowed-sb-binaries.txt` or `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt`, remember to include a link to the relevant issue and tag [@dotnet/source-build-internal](https://github.com/orgs/dotnet/teams/source-build-internal) as a reviewer.

### Validation and Cleaning

> The [BinaryTool](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/tree/main/eng/tools/BinaryToolKit) is used to validate binaries in the VMR and clean binaries from the VMR. You can run the tool locally by running `./eng/detect-binaries.sh`, `./eng/detect-binaries.sh --clean`, or `./prep-source-build/sh`.

Reviewer 2: I would avoid listing options here and defer to the help text.
```suggestion
The [BinaryTool](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/tree/main/eng/tools/BinaryToolKit) is used to validate binaries in the VMR and clean binaries from the VMR. You can run the tool locally by running `./eng/detect-binaries.sh` to detect binaries and  `./eng/detect-binaries.sh --clean` to remove binaries.  This functionality is also exposed via `./prep-source-build/sh`
```

#### Validation

> The tool detects "new" binaries by checking if they are listed in either `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt` or `allowed-sb-binaries.txt`. Note that the tool only uses `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt` as a baseline, but `allowed-sb-binaries.txt` is imported at the top of `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt`. This means that all binaries in `allowed-sb-binaries.txt` are also relevent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The tool flags all binaries not listed in `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt` or `allowed-sb-binaries.txt`. Note that the tool only uses `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt` as a baseline, but `allowed-sb-binaries.txt` is imported at the top of `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt`. This means that all binaries in `allowed-sb-binaries.txt` are also relevant.
```

00:21:10 info: BinaryTool[0] Finished all binary tasks. Took 6.9387884 seconds.
```

In this example, the tool detected 2 new binaries:
  - `src/wpf/src/Microsoft.DotNet.Wpf/src/Shared/Tracing/resources/MSG00001.bin`
  - `src/wpf/src/Microsoft.DotNet.Wpf/src/Shared/Tracing/resources/wpf-etwTEMP.BIN`.

If these binaries are permitted for source-build, add the binaries and/or relevent file glob pattern(s), such as `src/wpf/src/Microsoft.DotNet.Wpf/src/Shared/Tracing/resources/*.bin`, to `allowed-sb-binaries.txt`. Otherwise, add the binaries or relevent file glob pattern(s) to `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt`.

#### Cleaning

The tool cleans binaries from the VMR that are not listed in `allowed-sb-binaries.txt`. Binary cleaning runs automatically as part of `./prep-source-build.sh`.

To run cleaning, execute `./eng/detect-binaries.sh --clean` or `./prep-source-build.sh`. Executing `./prep-source-build.sh` will build the tool using previously source-built artifacts and remove non-source-build allowed binaries from the VMR whereas executing `./eng/detect-binaries.sh --clean` will build the tool using online resources and remove new binaries from the VMR.

An example output is as follows:

> ```

Reviewer 2: Code blocks should have a language listed.

 - `src/wpf/src/Microsoft.DotNet.Wpf/src/Shared/Tracing/resources/MSG00001.bin`
 - `src/wpf/src/Microsoft.DotNet.Wpf/src/Shared/Tracing/resources/wpf-etwTEMP.BIN`.
 
If these binaries are permitted for source-build, add the binaries and/or relevent file glob pattern(s), such as `src/wpf/src/Microsoft.DotNet.Wpf/src/Shared/Tracing/resources/*.bin`, to `allowed-sb-binaries.txt`. Otherwise, add the binaries or relevent file glob pattern(s) to `allowed-vmr-binaries.txt`.

## Licenses

### Policy

The VMR does not permit code and binaries licensed under non-OSS licenses. Fedora's approved open-source licenses can be found [on their wiki](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Licensing:Main#Good_Licenses), or you can check on the [OSI-approved list of licenses](https://opensource.org/licenses/alphabetical).

When a non-OSS license is detected, the offending code and binaries must be cloaked from the VMR. See [the VMR](./VMR-Design-And-Operation.md#repository-source-mappings) and [source-build documentation](https://github.com/dotnet/source-build/blob/main/Documentation/sourcebuild-in-repos/new-repo.md#cloaking-filtering-the-repository-sources) on cloaking.

### Detection

> Licenses are detected by the [license scan test](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/test/Microsoft.DotNet.SourceBuild.SmokeTests/LicenseScanTests.cs). This test is run as part of the [source-build license scan pipeline](https://dev.azure.com/dnceng/internal/_build?definitionId=1301&_a=summary) (internal Microsoft link). The test detects any license in the VMR that is not part of an exclusion listed in [`LicenseExclusions.txt`](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet/blob/main/test/Microsoft.DotNet.SourceBuild.SmokeTests/assets/LicenseExclusions.txt).

Reviewer 2: I think some explanation is need on why Fedora's licenses are listed but not any other distro's?

Author: Resolved by removing reference to Fedora's list of licenses and only mentioning the OSI-approved list of licenses.
